Course: CS 163, Computational Geometry
Semester: Fall 2021
Assignment: Final Project

Zetty Cho (echo02)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Submitted Files:
- generate_polygon.py : contains methods to generate random simple polygon
- graph_struct.py     : contains classes defining a Vertex, Edge, and Polygon 
- status.py           : contains Status class for our status DS 
- stopping_points.py  : contains method to sort vertices by x-coordinate
- make_monotone.py    : contains implementation for monotone algo
                        and runs program
- README              : this file

Code may be run with the following command:
    python3 make_monotone.py

When prompted, type in an integer value greater than 3 and hit return. 

The animation will save in the same directory under the name "sweep.gif"

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Project & Code Description:

    (Assume general position.)

    Given a simple polygon, this program will do a line sweep to determine 
    which vertices need to be connected by a diagonal to separate the 
    initial polygon into monotone sub-divisons. 

    Polygons are represented using the NetWorkX python package for graphs, as 
    well as in a doubly-linked list. 

    The general goal was to properly observe the necessary cases to be 
    considered when monotizing a simple polygon, how these cases could be 
    translated into actual code and implemented, and provide a visualization 
    of the process. 

    (generate_polygon.py)
    Given a square bounding box, the program generates points within those 
    constraints that obey general position. It then sorts those points in 
    counterclockwise order to specify a simple polygon. These points are then
    used to generate a graph of vertices that represent the polygon. 

    Calling just `generate_polygon(min, max)`, where `min` and `max` represent 
    the bounds of our points (which don't have to form a square) would be 
    sufficient to get the data. 

    (graph_struct.py)
    Defines Vertices, Edges, and Polygons (and their graphs) for later use in 
    the make_monotone methods. 

    Since a vertex in a simple polygon will only have two edges, one entering 
    from the CCW direction and one exiting, the Vertex class has pointers to 
    the vertices on the other ends of these edges. This is useful for later 
    determining what type of vertex we're dealing with for make_monotone. 

    Edges record the vertices for their left and right endpoints, the 
    corresponding "helper" nodes, and the slope and intercept of the segment.

    (status.py)
    Defines the Status DS. In the actual algorithm discussed in class, this is
    formed using a BBST, however, I implemented this using a list. More 
    discussion on this further below. 

    (stopping_points.py)
    Sorts vertices by their x-coordinate to make running the algorithm easier
    (and truly make it a sweepline).

    (make_monotone.py)
    For each of the vertices in the stopping points DS, the method in this file
    identifies what type of vertex it is (following definitions from David 
    Mount's Computational Geometry notes). The following updates to the graph 
    depend on these identifications of vertices. 

    Also animates the process. :)

-------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Learning & Other:

    One thing to note is that this project may have been easier and better 
    formatted had I used something like C++ rather than Python. While the 
    primary purpose of this assignment was definitely not to build more 
    familiarity with the coding language, I did find that it was very helpful 
    in teaching me how to NOT structure code in Python. I also was able to 
    build familiarity with the animation capabilities of matplotlib. 

    As previously stated, this algorithm is usually considered by using a 
    BBST for the Status DS. However, I simply used a list, which, as I've been
    told, significantly reduces the difficulty of the problem. However, the 
    purpose of this project (as mentioned in the previous section) was more 
    focused on the general form/requirements of making a simple polygon 
    monotone. While data structures are important for storing the graphs and 
    related information, I was more interested in studying how the cases may
    fall into place once we already had the data structures available for our 
    general use. 

    Although I just said that, a good portion of my time was spent considering 
    how to define the vertices and edges in the polygons, based on what would 
    potentially be necessary to run make_monotone effectively. I used the 
    lecture notes as suggestions for how to begin to structure my data (e.g. 
    using DLLs for the polygons). 

    For the actual cases in make monotone, I referred to a combination of 
    David Mount's lecture notes and the ones provided to us by Diane. Both of 
    them had similar approaches in considering linking up the "split" and 
    "merge" vertices in the polygon. I spent a lot of time mapping out how 
    these vertices may reference the necessary information and how they would 
    actually return the correct polygons. 

    However, during the process, I discovered that the cases outlined in both 
    sets of notes weren't completely translatable into code. For example, David 
    Mount's notes specified that we could only connect a vertex v to a helper 
    vertex IF the helper vertex was a merge vertex. There would be 
    times when this was necessary, but the edge above v didn't point to the 
    correct vertex! Because of the restrictions on the other types of vertices, 
    some edges would never be updated, resulting in some diagonals not being 
    drawn, which would give sub divisions of non-monotone polygons. 

    To remedy this, I went through and tracked each edge to make sure that it 
    would be pointing to the rightmost visible vertices (the new helper 
    vertices). Once this process was completed, the polygons started to 
    become monotone. 

    I learned how to make my code more iterative, especially so I could adjust 
    it to run animations. What I have yet to learn is how to do the opposite — 
    de-iterate it, so I can just have my code return the final expected figures. 

    All this is saying is that you will have the animations outputted at the 
    end of the algo, so you may need to download the .gif files from the hw 
    servers to verify that they do as promised. This also means that the algo 
    may run a little on the slower side, since it has to deal with these 
    outputs. 

    If you are Andrew Gonczi, please do not run this with 1000 as an input. 
    Not only does that give more than 1000 points (because it defines the 
    bounding box), but it would probably make your computer explode. 
    (I don't recommend this to anyone tbh.)